Welcome to the first lesson
in our course, which presents
an overview of parallelism.
Parallelism is a
form of computing
that performs several steps, or
phases, on multiple processors
or processor cores.
The first phase
involves splitting,
which means to partition the
overall task to be performed
into multiple sub-tasks.
Ideally, these sub-tasks should
be split efficiently and evenly
from the original task.
The next phase is
the applying phase,
which involves running these
independent sub-tasks that
were created in the
split phase in parallel
on multiple processor cores.
Although each sub-task runs
sequentially on one core,
together they all
run in parallel.
The third and final phase
is the combining phase,
which involves merging the
sub-results from the sub-tasks
into a single so-called
reduced result.
A key goal of parallelism is
to efficiently partition tasks
into sub-tasks and
combine the results
in a way that works well
under different conditions.
You can therefore
view parallelism
as an optimization intended to
improve the overall performance
of the system.
When we talk about
performance, we're
really referring to three
characteristics-- throughput,
which is the amount of work
that can be done per unit time,
such as per second,
per minute, per week;
scalability, which is the
ability to take the work
and scale it up over a larger
number of cores elastically;
and latency, which is a measure
of the delay between when
the request comes in
for the work to do
and when the work is
finished being performed.
Let's now talk about when
to apply parallelism.
It turns out in
practice, parallelism
works best under
certain conditions.
First and foremost, it helps
if the tasks themselves
are independent.
These are often referred to as
embarrassingly parallel tasks,
which have little
or no dependency
or need for communication
with other tasks,
or don't need to
share the results
from the intermediate tasks
between the other tasks.
A good example of embarrassingly
parallel processing in practice
is taking your clothes
to a laundromat, where
you may have many different
washing machines or dryers that
can wash and dry your
clothes in parallel.
And obviously, one load of
laundry in one washing machine
has no dependencies on
the other loads of laundry
in the other machines.
Another condition
where parallelism works
well is when there's lots
of data and processing
to perform on the
multi-processor cores.
In fact, there's even
a mathematical model
to estimate the
improvements that you're
likely to see from using
parallel processing.
This is called the
N times Q model,
and you can read more
about it in the link
at the bottom of the slide.
In this model, N is a
number of data elements
that are being processed per
thread or per core, and so on.
Q is a quantification
of how CPU-intensive
any given processing step is.
And the idea of this model is
if N times Q is a large number,
you're going to
get a better payoff
from parallel processing,
whereas if N times Q is
a small number, you probably
won't get much of a speedup.
Yet another condition under
which parallel processing
works well is when threads
that are performing
the processing on
the underlying cores
neither block nor share
any mutable state.
And as a consequence, Java's
parallelism frameworks,
which are based on something
called the fork-join pool
that we'll talk
about later, tend
to try to avoid blocking
if at all possible.
And in fact, there's a concept
called work stealing that's
implemented by
the fork-join pool
that we'll also cover
later in this course, which
talks about how a thread
that's running on a processor
core that runs out of work
to do in its work queue
will look around and
try to steal work
from the ends of other threads
that have too much work to do,
with the goal of
trying to maximize
CPU utilization in
the overall system.
And then, of course,
another condition
under which processing
works well in parallel
is if there are many processors
and/or multiple processor
cores.
So obviously, the larger
the number of the processing
elements in the hardware that
could actually run in parallel,
the better the
payoff we're going
to see from using
parallel processing.